==============
 The Internet
==============

The Internet is a pervasive aspect of modern computing.  Even small,
single-use scripts frequently interact with remote services to send or
receive data.  Python's rich set of tools for working with web
protocols makes it well suited for programming web-based applications,
either as a client or a server.

The :mod:`urllib.parse` module manipulates URL strings, splitting and
combining their components, and is useful in clients and servers.

The :mod:`urllib.request` module implements an API for retrieving
content remotely.

HTTP POST requests are usually "form encoded" with :mod:`urllib`.
Binary data sent through a POST should be encoded with :mod:`base64`
first, to comply with the message format standard.

Well-behaved clients that access many sites as a spider or crawler
should use :mod:`urllib.robotparser` to ensure they have permission
before placing a heavy load on the remote server.

To create a custom web server with Python, without requiring any
external frameworks, use :mod:`http.server` as a starting point.  It
handles the HTTP protocol, so the only customization needed is the
application code for responding to the incoming requests.

Session state in the server can be managed through cookies created and
parsed by the :mod:`http.cookies` module.  Full support for
expiration, path, domain, and other cookie settings makes it easy to
configure the session.

The :mod:`uuid` module is used for generating identifiers for
resources that need unique values.  UUIDs are good for automatically
generating Uniform Resource Name (URN) values, where the name of the
resource needs to be unique but does not need to convey any meaning.

Python's standard library includes support for two web-based remote
procedure call mechanisms.  The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)
encoding scheme used in AJAX communication and REST API is implemented
in :mod:`json`.  It works equally well in the client or the server.
Complete XML-RPC client and server libraries are also included in
:mod:`xmlrpc.client` and :mod:`xmlrpc.server` respectively.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    urllib.parse/index
    urllib.request/index
    urllib.robotparser/index
    base64/index
    http.server/index
    http.cookies/index
    webbrowser/index
    uuid/index
    json/index
    xmlrpc.client/index
    xmlrpc.server/index

..
    urllib.parse/index
    * urllib/index
      urllib2/index
      robotparser/index
    base64/index
    http.server/index
    * http.cookies/index
      Cookie/index
    webbrowser/index
    uuid/index
    json/index
    xmlrpc.client/index
    xmlrpc.server/index

..    wsgiref/index
